God, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, quiet our hearts as we come to study under your word.
May the words of my mouth and the meditations of our hearts be acceptable and pleasing to you, O Lord, our rock and our Redeemer.
Amen.
So let's read then starting with Haggai chapter two verse six.
Haggai, the prophet says, this is what the Lord Almighty says.
In a little while, I will once more shake the heavens and the earth, the sea and the dry land.
I will shake all nations, and what is desired by all nations will come.
And I will fill this house with glory, says the Lord Almighty.
The silver is mine, and the gold is mine, declares the Lord Almighty.
The glory of this present house will be greater than the glory of the former house, says the Lord Almighty.
And in this place, I will grant
Peace declares the Lord almighty.
And then from Luke chapter one, starting at verse 26.
In the sixth month of Elizabeth's pregnancy, God sent the angel Gabriel to Nazareth, a town in Galilee, to a virgin pledged to be married to a man named Joseph who was descendant of David.
The virgin's name was Mary.
The angel went to her and said, greetings, you who are highly favored, the Lord is with you.
Mary was greatly troubled at his words and wondered what kind of greeting this might be.
But the angel said to her, do not be afraid, Mary, for you have found favor with God.
You will conceive and give birth to a son and you are to call him Jesus.
He will be great and will be called the son of the most high.
The Lord God will give him the throne of his father, David, and he will reign over the house of Jacob forever.
His kingdom will never end.
How will this be?
Mary asked the angel since I am a virgin.
The angel answered, the Holy Spirit will come on you, and the power of the Most High will overshadow you.
So the Holy One to be born will be called the Son of God.
Even Elizabeth, your relative, is going to have a child in her own age, and she who is said to be unable to conceive is in her sixth month.
For with God, no, sorry there, for no word from God will ever fail.
I am the Lord's servant Mary answered, may your word be according to me, as may it be according to me, may it be to me according to your word."
And the angel left her.
At that time, Mary got ready and hurried to a town in the hill country of Judea, where she entered Zechariah's home and greeted Elizabeth.
When Elizabeth heard Mary's greeting, the baby in her womb leaped for joy, and Elizabeth was filled with the Holy Spirit.
And a loud voice she exclaimed, blessed are you among women, and blessed is the child you will bear.
But why am I so favored that the mother of my Lord should come to me?
As soon as the sound of your greeting reached my ears, the baby in my womb leaped for joy.
Blessed is she who has believed that the Lord would fulfill his promises to her.
And Mary said, my soul glorifies the Lord and my spirit rejoices and God my Savior.
For he has been merciful, the mindful of the humble state of his servant.
From now on, all generations will call me blessed.
For the mighty one has done great things for me.
Holy is his name.
His mercy extends to those who fear him from generation to generation.
He has performed mighty deeds with his arm.
He has scattered those who are proud in their inmost thoughts.
He has brought down rulers from their thrones, but has lifted up the humble.
He has filled the hungry with good things, but has sent the rich away empty.
He has helped his servant Israel, remembering to be merciful to Abraham and his descendants forever, just as he promised our ancestors.
And Mary stayed with Elizabeth for about three months and then returned home.
This is the word of the Lord.
Thanks be to God.
I would like us to think together, to ponder.
Can you think of a time in your life where you were given an announcement that shook up your life, that shook you maybe even to your core, and announcements, maybe a notice, a text, a call that has inexorably changed your life?
I think for many of us, especially in this season of Advent, we probably think children, right?
Whether we're parents, grandparents, great-grandparents, aunts, uncles, cousins, or even just friends with people who have had children pregnancy and birth can drastically change our lives.
I was thinking this morning of a woman who attends the church that Larissa and I went to in Ohio.
This was back in the 70s.
This kind of thing does not happen this quickly now.
But her and her husband were praying about whether they should adopt a child.
And she got a phone call from a doctor that they knew.
And he said, hey, I have somebody who is wanting to surrender their baby because she just can't take care of her.
Can you be here tomorrow morning to pick up a baby to adopt?
And she said, OK, great.
That is the Lord.
hitting me over the head with that.
And so she had to run out and buy everything to furnish a nursery, called her husband after she bought all that stuff, and said, hey, you know how we've been planning to adopt?
Well, the doctor just called me.
And the next day, they had a little baby girl in their house and in their home to raise.
That's a very drastic announcement.
But I'm not just thinking of things like that, though.
I think of getting a letter saying that I had been accepted to go to the college that I wanted to go to, whereas it turns out I'd be set on a path that has led me to my wife, my seminary degree, and ultimately here.
Now remember this, earlier this year, getting a call from Tim saying that you all would like me to move here and be your pastor.
But not all announcements are good, though.
Far, far from it.
I recall getting a call
Right at the end of my first year of undergrad, like two weeks before summer vacation, letting me know that the job that I had been promised this summer before was no longer available.
Many of us have gotten texts or calls or emails from family members or friends to let us know that someone important in our lives has died.
Or we've gotten announcements from doctors to let us know that scans have come back showing cancer or tumors or that a pregnancy is no longer viable.
Now, as you think about a life-changing announcement that you've experienced before, where was God for you in that time?
Was God present with you celebrating and jumping for joy with you?
Was God present in your friends and family members comforting and supporting you?
Did God's presence perhaps feel far away and distant from you?
If you're thinking of a situation that happened long in the past,
In hindsight, where do you see God inviting you to do something because of that event?
Or if you're currently in the midst of something right now, do you have a sense of what God is asking of you?
Now today, we're looking at two world-altering announcements, one from Haggai, the prophet, giving the word of the Lord to return to exiles from Babylon, and one from an angel to a teenage girl.
Now, firstly, we have the prophet Haggai.
This is in the year 520 BC.
If you want a deeper dive into this short book, Pastor Michael did a sermon series on that in the fall of last year, which you can find on our YouTube page or on the podcast feed on our website.
But what I will say here is that Haggai's main thrust of prophecies to compel and encourage these returned exiles from Babylon to begin to rebuild the Lord's temple in Jerusalem.
Now, these exiles as they had returned from Babylon starting to rebuild their lives in their homes, they had grown complacent, even maybe fearful of taking concrete steps to rebuild.
And God, through the prophet Hagai, tells the people that they're wasting their efforts on building fancy homes for themselves while neglecting the Lord's ruined temple.
And God encourages the people as they begin to work on the temple.
And the prophecy that we read today from chapter two comes about one month after they had started construction.
And this prophecy also comes about the time of the feast of booths or the feast of tabernacles.
When the Jewish people were commanded to build temporary structures outside of their homes to dwell and to remember their time wandering in the wilderness.
So think of the symbolism in the imagery here.
There's scaffolding all around the temple as the people have begun to build.
And there are all these temporary tents set up around people's houses.
And Haggai begins this prophecy before our text today by asking the people to look upon the one month of work that they have done on the temple.
And he says to them, does this seem like nothing to you?
They must have been discouraged in their work knowing how long it took to build the original temple in Solomon's day, knowing all the resources it took to build that temple, all the money, all of the labor, all the material.
This is when Israel was at the height of its power.
And now they have nothing but a burnt foundation to work with.
And indeed, it would take them over four years to construct this temple.
And I'm sure as these people were beginning to build it, they knew that it wouldn't be as impressive or fancy as its former iteration.
In this darkness and discouragement, Haggai tells the people that God has promised that His Spirit will be with them.
And God then promises in our text from Haggai today that He will shake all the nations.
And what is desired by all nations will come.
God will fill this house with glory.
And the glory of this present house, which is currently no more than foundations and scaffolding, will be greater than the glory of the former house.
And in this place, I will grant peace, declares the Lord Almighty.
Now what does God mean when he says that he'll shake the nations again?
Well, before this, the Old Testament prophets refer to God shaking the earth, shaking the nations when nations are defeated as in the prophets, Jeremiah Ezekiel's prophecies.
Or when God's presence comes on a space or upon a people as Ezekiel prophesies, God shakes the earth because of his anger.
This imagery of God shaking the earth and the nations is one that announces and proclaims God's ultimate power
over everything, even the mountains and the seas.
That which seems permanent to humans is merely temporary in God's eyes.
This promise of shaking things up then is a promise to God's people that as they rebuild this temple, God promises to fill this temple with His presence even more so than before and to bring all the nations to Him under His banner of peace.
And the shaking of the earth and the nations that has promised in Haggai will bring forth the treasures of all the nations who will bend the knee and worship the Lord Almighty.
Now I presume you can see where it goes from this, especially since we're in Advent and Christmas.
As with everything in Scripture, the book of Haggai and this prophecy points to Jesus.
Now, a key thing about prophetic words in Scripture is they always have a present and a future promise.
So this word from Haggai that God will be with his people that he will shake the nations is a tangible promise for these returned exiles who have begun their work to rebuild this temple.
And as they seek to resolitify their identity as God's people in their land once more.
But this also points us forward to Christ and even to us today as Haggai declares timeless truths about God.
God is present with his people.
God is at work in creation.
God is in control.
and God invites his people to participate in the work that he is doing.
The commenter, Jay Alec Mottier, nicely articulates it like this.
He says, the people of God in their present situation can commit themselves confidently to active involvement in the work of God and can do so without fear that all will come to nothing because the future
is in the hand of God and it will be splendid with richness, full of the presence of the Lord in all of His glory and bringing the blessing of peace.
This future is wholly, entirely God's doing.
So then just after just over 500 years after this prophecy from Haggai, we get another universe shaking announcement from God as God once again promises to be present with his people and invites them into what he is doing in the world.
Now in Luke's gospel, Luke has prepared his readers for something big happening with the announcement in chapter one of the birth of John the Baptist.
If you read this against the book of Genesis,
It hits a lot of the same beats as how God announced to Abraham and Sarah that they would have a son in their old age through whom God would bless all the nations of the earth.
Luke has set this stage in our text today by reminding us of this great story of the people of God, how God through uncommon means has brought about great things for his people and for the world.
But now we are given an announcement about something that is even greater than what has happened before.
Elizabeth, who was the mother of John the Baptist, has a relative, who was a teenager named Mary, engaged to a man named Joseph, who was in the lineage of King David.
Mary and Joseph are from a small village in the northern region of Galilee.
This to this teenage girl, as young as 12 even, in a small town,
probably content, if not excited, to marry into the storied lineage of David and just live a normal, peaceful life.
It is to this girl whom God announces something huge.
She will give birth to the promised Messiah, the Son of God, through whom God will dwell with His people in human form.
The angel Gabriel who brings this announcement to Mary assures her of God's presence and promise by telling her of Elizabeth's pregnancy as proof that God is indeed active and at work in creation.
He even alludes directly to God's promise to Abraham and Sarah because he tells Mary no word from God will ever fail after he announces to her Elizabeth's pregnancy.
In Genesis 18, God asks Abraham and Sarah, is anything too hard for the Lord?
And this after Sarah, someone understandably, laughs at the idea that she would be able to bear a child in her old age.
And so Mary, after hearing this, it hurries down to the hill country of Judea where Elizabeth lives.
And when she gets there, Elizabeth, Luke tells us, was filled with the Holy Spirit and proclaims, blessed are you, Mary, among women.
Blessed is the child you will bear.
Blessed is she who has believed that the Lord would fulfill his promises to her.
And then Mary testifies to God's faithfulness in verses 46 to 55, which contained what is known as the Magnificat, or Mary's song, which we will sing as our song of response.
In the grand tradition of women in the Bible, singing of God's faithfulness, declaring God's promises to his people like Miriam or Hannah, Mary declares God's mercy and faithfulness to her as God dains to look upon a person like her in such a humble state.
But God's promises and faithfulness to Mary are not all that she sings of.
As God has shaken her life with this announcement, the birth of this child will have far-reaching consequences for all peoples on earth.
God will once again shake everything up with the coming of this child, bringing rulers down from their thrones, raising up the humble, giving the hungry food and sending the rich away with nothing, continuing to covenant with his people forever.
as Haggai proclaimed timeless truths about God, so here Mary does as well.
This is consistent with the character of God throughout scripture.
God looks upon the poor and the humble, the unassuming, and he invites them to be a part of his plan for the world.
Abraham was a nomadic herdsman who had no direct heir.
David was the youngest son of his family, so unimportant and unassuming
that he was not invited to attend a family sacrifice with the prophet Samuel.
Now in that account in 1 Samuel, God has this lengthy back and forth with the prophet to convince him to see the world through God's eyes.
God tells Samuel that men look at the outward appearance, but the Lord looks at the inward, at the heart.
So to Mary seems to be of little cosmic importance until this point in her life.
Even everything surrounding the birth of Jesus is humble and quiet.
As we will read on Wednesday and over the next couple of weeks into Christmas tide, God chooses the humble and the poor over the powerful and the proud.
Right?
Who is it that learns first of the birth of the Savior of the world?
It's a group of shepherds, dirty, poor, probably young kids right around Mary's age, if not younger.
Wise men from the east come foreigners, astrologers who do not follow after the God of Israel.
And who is it that ignores the importance of this?
Who is it that instead only thinks of themselves and their power?
It's the king and the religious leaders.
I don't want to get too far ahead of myself and get into what we'll look at together in Christmas time, but God chooses the meek, the humble, the powerless as his people.
that he invites into the work of the world that he is doing.
And it is through this humility that God will topple empires, raise up the lowly and bring the world to him.
This world shaking will bring about God's justice and peace over all the world.
God will bring all nations to him and reign over them in peace.
God invites Mary to be a part of this cosmic design and in great faith she ascents to God's plan for her.
I am the Lord's servant, she says.
May it be to me according to your word.
So what is God announcing to you and I as we read this?
God is announcing to us through Haggai and through the angel, through Mary, through Luke that he has shaken up the world in the past and that he will do it again.
God is announcing that He is with us, Emmanuel, Jesus, the great son of the Most High has come.
Not only has He come, but He has given His life for our sins and has risen from the dead and ascended into heaven.
God has announced to us that He continues to be with us even now through the indwelling presence of the Holy Spirit in our hearts and who is in this space with us.
So what then is God inviting us to do?
What timeless truths do we need to be reminded of?
We have seen from Haggai and from Luke that when God announces something big, he promises to be with his people, promises to shake things up, and then invites his people to be a part of what he's already doing in the world.
God invited the returned exiles of Haggai's time to take part in his work by rebuilding the temple and refounding themselves as his people.
God invited Mary to assent to the Holy Spirit coming upon her so that she would conceive and give birth to the Messiah.
So what does God invite us to do as we read these earth-shaking announcements?
As we look to our Savior, the desire of nations, the King of peace, how are we being invited to serve Him and to work alongside Him for the purpose of God's kingdom here on earth as we await Christ's return?
We are being invited by God to be His church.
We are invited by God to be the bride of Christ, God's body here on earth.
The apostle Peter writes this in 1 Peter 2.
He says, as you come into Him, that is Jesus, the living stone, you also like living stones are being built into a spiritual house to be a holy priesthood.
And you are a chosen people, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, God's special possession, that you may declare the praises of Him who called you out of darkness into His wonderful light.
Once you were not a people, but now you are the people of God.
Once you had not received mercy, but now you have received mercy.
As God's people who live in this already but not yet time between the incarnation and the return of Christ,
We are inheritors of all of these promises that God has made to His people throughout the millennia.
To Abraham and Sarah, to David through Samuel, to these returned exiles through Haggai, to Elizabeth and Mary through Gabriel the angel, these announcements of God shaking the earth and doing great and new things, these promises of God's presence with His people, this invitation to join in the work of His kingdom here on earth, all of these are ours.
because we are God's people.
And that is all well and good, but let's get a little bit practical as we wrap up here.
What are we here in this space being invited to do in this community?
Where are we being invited by God to do the work of his kingdom, to bring an end to division and to unite all peoples under Christ, our king of peace here in Midland?
Thank you, Miles.
That is what we as a church have been asking for the past few years.
This is why we now have our new mission statement, learning to live and love like Jesus has broken people saved by grace.
This is why we have our key values of God's Word and community and integrity and renewal of the mind and service.
This is why the missional deacons and the consistry with your input have discerned that God is calling us to address food insecurity and social needs in our community around us.
This is the discerning question for us as a church as we go forth into the season of ministry guided by our priorities that we have already discerned.
Now, that's not to say that the answer to what is God inviting us to do ends with, well, we've been working on it.
Good job, everybody.
It is good.
It is great that we have been working on discerning these things, but it is also of utmost importance that we continue to seek after God in everything we do.
How does God invite us to live into this world?
How does God invite us to interact with people who we disagree with, who vote differently than us?
How does God invite us to bring about His Kingdom in this fallen chaotic and broken world?
We look to Jesus.
for these answers.
We look to Him, the author and perfecter of our faith.
My friends, brothers and sisters in Christ, as Mary proclaimed, God has done great things for us.
He is merciful to those who seek after His ways.
He has promised to be with us and He has upheld that promise and continues to do so.
He has brought peace to the world through the light of the world.
His Son, our Savior, Jesus.
He has broken into this world with that peace.
It is under his banner of peace that all the nations on earth will come under him.
It is under that banner of peace that we seek to unite all peoples, all nations.
As we seek after where God is calling us to minister, let our hearts sing the words that we have already sung with our voices, O come, desire of nations, bind to all peoples in one heart and mind, bid all our sad divisions cease and be thyself.
our king of peace.
May it be so.
Amen.
As we think of how to respond to this call, as we think about how to respond to God's invitation to us to work with Him in the world and in our community, just have a few things for you to mull over.
Perhaps you want to write them down on the little yellow response slips, take it home, put it in the offering plate.
Is there something tangible that I think God is calling me to do right now?
That could be in our church life.
That could be in our community.
That could be in our families.
Is there something that God is putting on your heart that's something tangible that you can do in the next few weeks?
Perhaps you might think of a praise
for how God has led you through a difficult announcement or a prayer request as you navigate that now.
Perhaps you might think of what it looks like in your life to follow after this desire of nations.
What does it look like for me to bring about God's peace?
Or perhaps, are there ways in which I am hindering God's peace in the world?
through my thoughts, my words, or even my deeds.
If so, what do I need to do to repent of that?